OK, let us start. So I would like
to mention that you allow the
cheat sheet, which is longer than
the first midterm. And I would like
to mention that the topics here, which I'm
going to cover on the midterm, I wrote
them down, basically. So you probably
should expect at least some questions on
from these topics and this is basically
what you have to know and so and one thing
which is important is this change of
coordinates and the matrix of linear
transformation dimension rank and nullity and
certainly nulity, rank nulity theorem
about a matrix, you for certain will
have a problem concerning diagonalization and
when dot product orthogonal sets,
orthogonal original basis, Gram-Schmidt, least square problems, QR decomposition. So there are
two topics which I covered, there's
about models and general
inner product. And I'm not going
to cover them in this midterm, but
they go to final. And any other questions
before? so you always ask me if
there will be proof problems so there will
be proof problems by promise to be very
easy problems but still today I'm more
concentrate on them than rather on
calculations so my examples were mostly will be
not all but I think computations is a
sort of easier for you than proof problems
so basically we are going to do the
problems one by one. When I run out
of them, probably the review
session is over. You should remember
what date is today, right? But I
think you still trust me about the
material we just covered. So let us
start with this one. So P2 is, so
we have here a vector space
P2, which is a polynomials of
degree at most two. This is three
-dimensional space. Oops, I think there
is a little typo here. Sorry, it
should be p as well. OK, so this is what is called differential
operator, which involves
derivatives, multiplication by functions, addition,
and all this. And the point is what it
is linear operator, a linear
transformation in P2. So as we know, P2 has the standard basis,
1T, T squared. And the question is
just to write down the matrix of T
relative to the basis B. So this is the matrix M. And it also has a
notation like this. T, brackets B, but I'm
not going to use this notation. I'm just
going to remind you that this is the notation
we use for the matrix. So how we do it? So we have a system
of coordinates given by one, T,
and T squared. And so I have to
compute a value of T on all these
three vectors in the basis. So
what is T of one? one, p double prime
second derivative is zero, and the
first derivative is zero, so it's
just one, right? T of t, so it's going to
be t squared times the second
derivative of t. What is the second
derivative of t? First derivative
is one, second is zero, right? so this
term is actually consoles plus T
prime what is T prime is that's going
to be 1 plus T so it is going to be
1 plus T right and finally I should
apply this transformation
to T squared T squared times T
squared double prime so what is t squared
double prime, but let me finish. So t squared prime
plus t squared. So this is 2 here
for the first term is 2, but it's
2. I multiply it back to t squared,
so it is 2t squared plus 2t, right,
plus t squared. It's going to be 3t squared plus 2t, correct? OK, so now how do
we do the matrix? and so the first column I
take the vector and it goes to itself
so the first vector and coordinates are
1 0 0 so for the second vector I have
first plus second vector so this
this is going to be like this right and
for the last one I'm going to have
0 because there is no constant term
here, plus 2t, plus 3. So this is the end of the story. Any
questions here? So what do you
use here when you have a basis, v1, vn, which is basis b? So what you do, you
take the matrix M to B, matrix whose columns
are coordinates of the image of each
of the basis vector, coordinates with
respect to basis B. This is the general
formula for this. Any questions? I consider this
as a very easy problem, okay?
You agree? Good. Let's go to the
second problem. So this is M. Let
me copy it again. Yeah, it's good. It's this M. I'm
just going to ask the question
about this M now. And I would like
to ask if this M diagonalizable. It
actually means that this linear transformation
T is diagonalizable. And to answer
this question, the first thing that
you have to do is to compute
eigenvalues. What can you say about
this matrix? It is upper triangular,
and therefore, eigenvalues are just
entries on diagonal. So I have 1, but 1 goes with multiplicity 2. When? 3. So if I have
three different values, the
answer is easy. But if not, I have to
work a little bit more, and I have to find.
And so basically what I have to find, what
is the key point, since I don't ask you
really diagonalize this matrix, but just to
determine if it is diagonalizable, you
actually have to check what is the eigenspace for
the eigenvalue one. And it must be two
-dimensional, right? And if it is one
-dimensional, then it is not
diagonalizable. And if it is two-dimensional,
then it is. So how I do that? I
just take m minus i, because I'm talking
about lambda equals 1, and this
is going to be, sorry, this is 0, and
here is 1. I'm sorry. And here I have
2, and here we also have 2, because
I subtract 1. Well, what would
be the nullity and rank of this matrix? What do you think?
Nullity and rank. What about
pivots? How many pivot positions
do I have here? Two, rank two, nullity one. What does it mean? That my eigenspace
is one-dimensional. The Conclusion, diagonalizable or not? No. Good, also not
difficult, right? OK. So this is something
a little bit more involved. It's
a so-called proof, and maybe it's a
little bit hard. But I divide
it into parts. Suppose I have
a square matrix. So the first I would
like to show, and I take its power, I can
take a, a squared, etc. And I consider
the powers, and I would like
to show first that the column
of the k plus first power is a
subspace inside column space
of a to the k. How we do it? Any ideas? Yeah, but why do you
need equation? Do you really
need equation? So what is the
meaning of column A? This is one way.
Another way? If you think about
A as a linear transformation
from Rn to Rn, there is another interpretation
of column A. Did you remember
about range of linear transformation? Right? What is range? Range of linear
transformations is all these vectors which
are presented as 8 applied to some
other vector. And so So column A is
actually range of A. And this is the space of all vectors of
the form AV, for some V in Rn. Okay, so what is
column A to the K? It's the same
thing, range. A to the K is A, all the vectors
which can be written as A to
the K plus to V. Now, column A K plus one, the same thing. So what I'm saying is
that every vector which can be
written in this way can be also written
in this way. Why? Because it is just AK of A of V, right? And A of V is in R. I use here that the
matrix is square so it maps from the same space
again and again. so clear this which is
above is bigger right so what I use here I
use here another way to look at what is the column
I use interpretation of a as a linear
transformation okay questions clear so and
this is my second question suppose there are some
matrices such that their power is zero they
are called important. Some power is zero.
And so what I'm claiming that if some
big power of A is zero, when A has size n by n, then already nth power
is zero. So if it is a square matrix
of size two by two, and some power
of A is zero, then A squared
is already zero. Okay? How do we prove it? So we have, so
first of all, if a to the n is 0, when column A
couldn't be the whole rn. Who
can tell me why? It is smaller. It is a smaller subspace
inside rn. So if column A
equals Rn, what can I say about this linear
transformation? Is it onto, one-to-one? The range is
the whole thing. Is it onto or one-to-one? Onto. But it's a
square, right? You remember nullity
plus rank is n. So if column A equals Rn, then A is invertible. Could the power of an invertible matrix be 0? If the matrix is
invertible, any power of it is
invertible, right? If A is invertible, A
squared is invertible, A cube is invertible,
et cetera, right? OK. And the
same, what I'm going to say that if I have
this condition here, that column A to
the k plus 1 is always strictly
smaller than column A. Smaller, that means
that it is not equal. Why? Unless, unless A to
the k is already 0. If there's a zero, then it's a zero,
okay? Now, why? Suppose column
A to the key equals column
A to the key. When, look, A maps column A to the key to itself, and
it is onto. And if it is not a
space, I can apply it again and again. It
is invertible here. Therefore, I can never get zero again, okay? Now, how can I use this condition to check this? So look, I start with
n-dimensional space. Column A has dimension at most n minus 1, right? Because of this. For the same
reason, dimension of column a squared is
at most n minus 2. And when I come
to dimension of column, a to
the n is less or equal than
0. So it's a 0. And that means that
a to the n is 0. Okay, so here we use
several things. We use the fact about
dimensions. a dimension of a subspace which is
not a whole space is strictly smaller each
time dimension drops at least by one rank of
matrix dimension is just a rank of matrix
rank of matrix drops at most by one and starts
with n and goes down until it is zero but
it might be that even before n so if it's
three by three matrix it could happen but
a squared is zero but if you know that a to
100 is 0, that means what? A cube is already
0. OK? Make sense? Good. So this is another so
-called proof problem. So suppose I have a matrix such
that A squared is the identity matrix. OK? So there are two
questions. The first should be very easy. but if
lambda is an eigenvalue of a when lambda is
equal plus or minus 1 who can tell me how
to do this problem so suppose lambda is
an eigenvalue when it comes with some
eigenvector right so there is vector u not
equal to 0 such with AU is lambda U
by definition of an eigenvector. Now what is A
squared of U? From one point of U is I of U. What is I of U? U. But from another
point, A squared of U is A of
lambda lambda u is lambda a of u is
lambda squared u. So what we have? Lambda squared u is equal to u. When it could happen only if lambda squared is 1. So in general, therefore, lambda is plus
or minus 1. Now we would like to
see, we will, huh? Yeah, sorry, I, somebody has a question. Yeah. No, you, you,
you're, you're just thinking aloud, right?
Okay, of course. Let us do the
second question. We would like to show that A is diagonalizable. And this is
unclear, right? Because we only
know that there are two ways
for eigenvalues. So we can at most
have two eigenspaces, OK? So here is
maybe a little bit. So if I give such
a problem on exam, I give you the hint,
because it might be. There are several
ways to do it. One important way.
Suppose I have a vector v, which is
not an eigenvector. So I can have a v plus v, and it is an eigenvector. If I get value
1, let us check. So I do A, apply
it to AV plus V, okay? This is A
squared V, okay? A squared V
plus AV, but A squared is I, so
it is V plus IV. So this vector
is multiplied, sorry, it
remains as it is. Is it clear? Okay, good. Now, the
only trouble is that AV plus V sometimes
might be 0, right? I don't know. If
I do this with any vector, some
vectors are going to be 0. But what
are these vectors? AV plus V0, what is it? That means that
AV is minus V. Okay? So what does it
mean? that v is eigenvector with
eigenvalue negative 1, okay? So what we do,
what's actually a, v plus v, it's just
a plus i, right? So nullity of a plus 1 is eigenspace
with eigenvalue minus 1 as we just
showed here. The range is eigenspace with
eigenvalue 1, because I just
checked that the image is going to be
multiplied by 1. Nullity is n. So dimension of
eigenspace of 1 plus dimension of eigenspace
of eigenvalue minus 1 is the
whole thing, right? some of the
dimension of eigen. From the rank
knowledge theorem, we have the dimensions, sum of dimensions of
eigen spaces is n. Any questions about this? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Wait, I
applied for any V. The point is I
take a linear transformation A plus
I, and then the range of this transformation
is exactly all vectors which
have eigenvalue 1. the range, the image
of the map. I start with vector, but if the
range, right? I have a vector, and I make
out of it eigenvector of an eigenvalue of 1
by applying a plus i. OK? But sometimes it might
go to 0. But when it goes to 0, this is
exactly when we started with a vector with
eigenvalue minus 1. Okay? So the range of
this a plus y, of this linear
transformation, is eigenspace
with eigenvalue 1. And then null
space, or kernel, is exactly eigenvalue with eigenspace minus 1. And their sum of
this dimension by rank nullity theorem
is exactly n. Okay, so what I said is
just written here. Questions,
more questions. So let us do
something, if you don't have questions. So don't scare you away, probably if I
give you such, that would be might
be difficult. But if I actually ask you
in steps, then it shouldn't be so
difficult, right? right? But yeah, plus I. What is A? A is a map or transformation
from Rn to Rn. And what is A plus I? It's the sum of two
transformations. It's again a linear
transformation. The same thing. You take matrix, you
get another matrix. They are both linear
transformations. So I can talk
about nullity and rank of A plus A. And I just showed
to you that the new space of A plus A is
exactly eigenvectors of minus 1 with
eigenvalue minus 1. Yes? I just wanted
to ask, how did we come up with
the idea to try? How, I don't know,
it's how, because actually what is
AV plus V, okay? It's actually you study A plus I and A minus what? I. I and A minus I are
important because they're exactly how you try
to find eigenvalues. That's how you come up
with this idea, okay? Yeah. Okay, let's
move, because I want to do
something more. So these are
something simple, something which is
not very difficult. We want to find
orthogonal basis in the Coulomb space,
and we should use, yeah, so Gram-Schmidt, right? But let us
look carefully. This is 3 by 3 matrix. If it was non
-degenerate, then it is not interesting,
right? Because the column space
is the whole thing. But this one is, in fact, the rank of this matrix. If you add all the
columns, it's going to be zero. There is linear
dependence between columns. So the rank
of A is actually 2. Is it clear? If I take sum of
three columns, when it's going
to be 0. So there is a linear
dependence. You can also
compute determinant, but you don't
need it, right? So actually,
therefore, I can take for two linearly
dependent vectors. I don't need to
work with all three, right? Is it clear
what I'm doing? Okay. So I just apply this
process once. So U1 is not changed. First vector
remains as it is. For the second vector, so let's call
this V1 and V2. For the second vector, I do projection, right, subtracted projection
equals V2 minus V2 dot V1 or U1. it's just
the same, divided by u1, u1, dot u1, dot
u1, and multiply on u1. Okay, so let's do it. V2 is minus 1, 2, minus 1. okay who can tell
me what is v2 dot u1 so basically it's
a dot product of two uh these two
vectors what is it minus three yeah i
think it is minus three uh minus two minus two
plus one minus three And what is U1, U1? It is 4 plus 1
plus 1, right? 4 plus 1 plus 1, 6. So here I have three halves. One half. One half. It's minus, but
there is one more minus, so
it is positive. Right? So we're going to
have three halves. And minus three halves, okay? And you can check
whether it is orthogonal to
the first vector. Okay? But what I'm
trying to say, if I give you matrix,
which is non -degenerate, yet you
don't have to do that, right, in this
particular case. Now, what I want
to do, I want to do orthogonal projection
of this vector on the column A, the
matrix here. I'm just going to compute
orthogonal projection. And for this, I
need arthonormal basis. So I
first start with orthogonal. I don't
need arthonormal basis, sorry, just
orthogonal basis. And here I do
something. You see, I can take proportional
vector, which would be easy. If I
take instead 0, 1, minus 1, it's just
easy to compute. Question, yeah? Yeah, because the rank is 2. Sorry? How come the rank is 2 and then I can count? Because as I
explained, if you add all these three
columns, you get 0. Add three columns. So these three
vectors, three columns vectors, are
linearly dependent. Okay. So for U2, I can
rescale. It's actually a little bit
easier just to use this vector, just
for computation. They're still
orthogonal, right? It's just multiple, just
for easy computation. Okay, so now how
we do projection? let us write
down y hat so what you do
we do y dot u1 divided by u1
dot u1 times u1 plus y u2 divided by u2 dot u2
u2 okay so the first y u1 is what y u1 is
2 no y dot u1 is 2. 2 divided by u1, u1 we computed it's
already 6, right? But for the
second one, it is 0, right? So this
is actually 0. So it just shows minus 1 third, minus 1 third. So this is a
projection of y onto this column
space, okay and there's a
second question how to find the distance who can tell me how
to find the distance yeah so this is the norm of now if I subtract I'm
going to have minus yes minus one third minus one third minus 1 3rd yeah and
you remember that for square root somebody's
saying square roots of course for norm
you take square roots of dot product so a
square root of 1 3rd square plus 1 3rd
square plus 1 3rd square It looks to me
that we have 1 over 9 three
times, so it is square root of
1 third, right? Done. So reasonable
problem, right? Okay. Yeah, question. Let me check how
much time I have. Okay. So the next one,
I would like to do list
squares problem. Okay. Here we do one. So I would like to
remind you how we do it. So we want to
solve Ax equals b, but we can solve it
only approximately right so if we
do that what we do we multiply by
a transposed and we instead solve
in this linear system okay so first
let us figure out what is a transposed
times a think it is 14 in 6 plus 2, 8,
8, 4 plus 1, 5. I think this is correct. So now I would
like to multiply A transposed
times this vector b. And in this case,
it's going to be 3, 2, 1, 2, 1, 0
times 1 minus 1, 1. Let's see what we get. So it is 2, 3, minus 2, plus 1, 4, 3, minus 2, plus
1, 2, correct. And for the second one, it's going to be 1, okay. Wow. So I actually have to solve this system. Well, 14, 8, 8, 5 times x equals to 1. So very simple
linear system. Let me just give
you the answer. We didn't actually compute
the answer, so we have to solve it.
Okay, let us solve it. So what is the best way to solve it, actually? For example, we can take the inverse of
this matrix. So how do we find the inverse of the matrix? It's just 1 over
the determinant of the matrix times...
1 over 6, right? 70 minus 64 times... 14 minus 8
minus 8, right? And then I multiply
it by 2, 1. And what I'm going
to get, 10 minus 8 and 1 over 6,
10 minus 8 is 2. Minus 16 plus 14,
is it 2 again? Right, wait. Minus 2, minus 2, better. Minus 2. Minus
16 plus 14. So the answer
is going to be 1 over 1 third
minus 1 third. Does it make any
sense to you? Okay. So how
to find error? What is least squares
error who remembers yes yes so I take
B and I have ax right so basically
ax minus B or B minus X it doesn't matter
and again I take the norm the distance
right so what is ax minus B so B we
know what is ax no oh no wait wait a I
wrote a incorrectly a is this one so I
have let me write it down ax is three two
two one one zero times one third minus one
third oh sorry oh my what I'm going to
get one minus two thirds is going to
be one third gain one third right? 2
minus 1 third and again 1 third, right? I'm not
mistaken, 1 third. So I take 1 minus 1,
1, subtract 1 third, end up with 2 thirds,
minus 2 thirds, 2, minus 1, is it
2 thirds, right? And you just
compute, it's norm. Well, guys, I don't know,
I have more problems. If you want, I am
going to post them, and you will contrive
them as exercise, okay? So I am going
to post them, and you will exercise. So I wish good